# Gmod MongoDB Wrapper (WIP)

> ## ðŸ« For Educational Purposes
> This repository serves mostly as a Developer reference for your own projects. I no longer play Garry's Mod, so **this is a side-project that I do not intend to actively maintain.**

> ## ðŸš§ WIP! (Unstable Code)
> This project is under active development. Semantic versioning is only loosely being adhered to and you can only get these guarantees:
> * **Everything will change.**
> * **Code will change radically and break.**

This is a Garry's Mod module that has the goal to expose all [.NET MongoDB Driver](https://docs.mongodb.com/drivers/csharp/) functionality to Lua. We do this by automatically binding all public classes, methods, properties and fields in the MongoDB .NET Driver. [&raquo; See 'Differences with the MongoDB .NET Driver'](#differences-with-the-mongodb-net-driver)

This module is built using [Gmod.NET](https://github.com/GmodNET/GmodDotNet).

## Requirements

* Install at least version `1.0.0` of [Gmod.NET](https://github.com/GmodNET/GmodDotNet).    
    [&raquo; Check the dependencies for the version](https://github.com/luttje/gmod-net-mongodb/network/dependencies)
* Garry's Mod must be configured to use the `x86_64` beta branch.
* You must have a MongoDB Server installed and running.    
    [&raquo; Get the MongoDB Community Server here](https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/community)

    *Tip: Install **MongoDB Compass** when the Community Server Installer recommends it to you.*

## Installation

1. Download [a release](https://github.com/luttje/gmod-net-mongodb/releases)
2. Unzip the downloaded release to your `garrysmod\lua\bin\Modules\GmodMongoDb` directory (create the `bin`, `bin\Modules` and/or `bin\Modules\GmodMongoDb` directories if they dont exist)

## Usage
Check [the tests](./GmodMongoDb/Tests/Lua/gmodmongodb/) for more examples.

### Connecting
First load this module using the Gmod&period;NET function `dotnet.load`:
```lua
dotnet.load("GmodMongoDb")
```

Instantiate a client using a valid MongoDB connection string:
```lua
client = MongoDB.Driver.MongoClient("mongodb://myusername:superdupersecretpassword@127.0.0.1:27017/myappname?retryWrites=true&w=majority")
```
*You should only have a single client. You can re-use that for multiple different databases.*

### Fetching data
Get a database object, then get a collection object from it:
```lua
local database = client:GetDatabase("myappname")
local collection = database:GetCollection(
  GenericType(MongoDB.Bson.BsonDocument), 
  "players"
)
```
Since we are binding to C# methods and classes, some of those may be [generic](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/fundamentals/types/generics). For that reason you may need to supply a generic type using the `GenericType` function. Any class that has a constructor can be used as a generic type.

You can filter using a BSON Document or function. 

#### Using a Lua table to filter:
```lua
local filterDocument = MongoDB.Bson.BsonDocument.Parse(
  util.TableToJSON({
    _id = "STEAM_0:1:123456"
  })
)
local filter = MongoDB.Driver["BsonDocumentFilterDefinition`1"](GenericType(MongoDB.Bson.BsonDocument), filterDocument)
local amount = collection:Count(filter)
print(amount)
```

#### Using a JSON string to filter:
```lua
local filterDocument = MongoDB.Bson.BsonDocument.Parse("{_id: 'STEAM_0:1:123456'}")
local filter = MongoDB.Driver["BsonDocumentFilterDefinition`1"](GenericType(MongoDB.Bson.BsonDocument), filterDocument)
local amount = collection:Count(filter)
print(amount)
```

**Using a function to filter is not supported.**

### Inserting data

#### Using a JSON string to insert data:
```lua
local newDocument = MongoDB.Bson.BsonDocument.Parse(
  util.TableToJSON({
    name = "Jane Doe",
    age = 28,
    alive = true,
  })
)
collection:InsertOne(newDocument)
```

## Documentation

When I push to the `main` branch documentation will be generated by a GitHub Workflow using [DocFx](https://dotnet.github.io/docfx/). You can find those docs on [this GitHub Pages Environment](https://luttje.github.io/gmod-net-mongodb/).

### Differences with the MongoDB .NET Driver

This module automatically binds to version `2.19` of the MongoDB .NET Driver. You can find [it's API documentation here](
https://mongodb.github.io/mongo-csharp-driver/2.19/apidocs/).

Most of the functionality and usage in Lua should be identical to it's C# variant. The only differences are caused by Lua missing some features that C# has (like generics, classes and constructors).

This means that besides our documentation you may find [the .NET MongoDB Driver API Reference](https://mongodb.github.io/mongo-csharp-driver/2.19/apidocs/) helpful.


> #### Some examples of differences
> 
> ##### Constructors
> *In C#: `var client = new MongoClient(connectionString)`*
> 
> In GmodMongoDb Lua objects are instantiated by calling the type as a function:
> ```lua
> local client = MongoDB.Driver.MongoClient(connectionString)
> ```
>
> ##### Getting a database from a client
> *In C#: `var database = client.GetDatabase("dbName")`*
>
> In GmodMongoDb Lua:
> ```lua
> local database = client:GetDatabase("dbName")
> ```
> 
> ##### Generics
> *In C#: `var collection = client.GetCollection<MongoDB.Bson.BsonDocument>("collectionName")`*
>
> In GmodMongoDb Lua generics are passed as the first arguments to a function, using the `GenericType` helper function:
> ```lua
> local collection = client:GetCollection(GenericType(MongoDB.Bson.BsonDocument), "collectionName")
> ```
> 

## Contributing

If you have some suggestions or questions feel free to drop an issue.
